Gradient elastoplasticity theories include the dependence on the gradient of the field describing the plastic distortion within a solid body. From the modeling viewpoint, this is motivated by the need to incorporate an internal characteristic length scale and correctly describe size effects. The addition of the dependence on the plastic distortion gradient entails also mathematical benefits for the proof of existence theorems. Indeed, it ensures a sufficiently strong compactness to perform the various passages to the limit when nonlinearities – which come from complex constitutive models or the geometry of large deformation – are involved.

In this thesis, we develop and analyze some models of gradient plasticity, mainly addressing the modeling aspects and the existence theory. To develop the mechanical models, we systematically adopt a general framework based on the principle of virtual powers and inspired by the approach to gradient plasticity of Gurtin and Anand, where a microscopic balance of microforces – those describing the plastic response – is added alongside the usual macroscopic balance of forces.

The first model we study is a simplified one-dimensional model of a metallic cylindrical bar. The assumption is that the configurations are described in terms of solely three fields defined along its length: the axial displacement of the cross section, their transversal dilation, and the axial plastic distortion. We consider two versions of that model: a linearized model valid in the regime of small deformations, and a geometrically nonlinear model that allows for large deformations. In both cases, we develop an existence theory by resorting to the theory of evolutionary variational inequalities for the small deformation model, and to the theory of energetic solutions of rate-independent systems by Mielke and Theil for the large deformation model. Then, we perform an analysis of the particular boundary value problem that describes the tensile test – the problem in which an assigned tensile force or elongation is prescribed at the ends – with the aim of understanding whether the model is able to describe the necking phenomenon. We show that the linearized model is not able to predict necking, and we perform a formal stability analysis of the model at large deformations, gaining qualitative insights about the onset of necking.

The second gradient plasticity model we focus on regards plastic materials whose yield strength depends on hydrostatic pressure. Instead of adopting the theory of non-associated plasticity – commonly employed in the geotechnical modeling of soils and rocks – we propose an alternative approach. The key idea is to include a kinematic constraint on the volumetric part of the plastic distortion (for example, the constraint of plastic incompressibility), impose it through a Lagrange multiplier representing an internal pressure, and make the constitutive relation of the deviatoric plastic microforce dependent on it. We develop an existence theory using the Rothe method: the problem is first discretized in time and the existence of a time-discrete approximate solution is established; then, the actual continuous-in-time solution is recovered in the limit of vanishing time step. The incremental problem that emerges from the time discretization has a saddle-point structure and is solved as follows: first, the volumetric plastic distortion is determined by applying the kinematical constraint; then, the other kinematical unknowns are found for an arbitrary internal pressure by solving a static nonlinear problem (the existence of solution is established using the Minty-Browder theorem). Finally, the internal pressure is recovered as the solution of a fixed-point problem, the existence of which is obtained by an application of the Schauder theorem.
